[Polkadot Wiki Migration] Development Networks (#18)
polkadot-developers/polkadot-docs: polkadot-protocol/introduction/polkadot-networks.md

---
title: Development Networks
description: This section contains the list of networks and resources available for developers in the Polkadot ecosystem for testing purposes. 
hide: 
- feedback
template: subsection-index-page.html
---

# Polkadot Development Networks

> The development and testing networks and resources presented here are intended for Polkadot core developers, Parachain developers, 
> application developers as well as the end users.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The development and testing networks and resources presented here are intended for Polkadot core developers, parachain developers, application developers and end users.
```

![Polkadot Development infographic](/images/polkadot-protocol/introduction/development-networks.png)

> Polkadot Core Developers typically test upgrades on a local development node. Then they are deployed and tested on [Westend](#westend). 

Reviewer: "Polkadot Core Developers" is capitalized here, but not above

## Kusama Network

Kusama is the experimental development network for teams who want to innovate, move fast and test their applications on a
production grade environment with economics and game theory involved. It comprises of a relay chain with its own governance, system chains 
and parachains.

Native token: KSM

## Test Networks

The tokens for the test networks listed below are available through [faucet.polkadot.io](https://faucet.polkadot.io/){target=\_blank} 

### Westend

A perma-testnet (that is not reset back to genesis block) intended for Polkadot core developers and maintained by Parity Technologies. 
Primarily used to test features that are to be deployed onto Kusama and then to Polkadot. 

Native token: WND

### Paseo

[Paseo](https://github.com/paseo-network){target=\_blank}  is a community-run testnet which mirrors the runtime of Polkadot and its system chains. It is intended for parachain and dapp developers and is maintained by the members of 
Polkadot community.

Native token: PAS

### Rococo

Testnet intended for parachain developers (to be deprecated on Oct 14th 2024). It is maintained by Parity Technologies.

Native token: ROC

> ## Local Test Networks

Reviewer 2: We can also link to the existing guides we have created for Zombienet and Chopsticks. /develop/application-devs/tooling/zombienet and /develop/application-devs/tooling/chopsticks. The location of this pages are subject to change

---
title: Development Networks
description: This section contains the list of networks and resources available for testing purposes for developers in the Polkadot ecosystem. 
---

# Polkadot Development Networks

## Introduction

> Development and testing are vital to building robust dApps, parachains, and network upgrades in the Polkadot ecosystem. This section provides a comprehensive overview of the networks and tools for developers to experiment, test, and refine their innovations in a risk-free environment before deploying them to production networks. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Development and testing are vital to building robust dApps, parachains, and performing network upgrades in the Polkadot ecosystem. This section provides a comprehensive overview of the networks and tools for developers to experiment, test, and refine their innovations in a risk-free environment before deploying them to production networks. 
```

Whether you're a Polkadot core developer, parachain engineer, or application developer, the resources outlined here will help you ensure your solutions are thoroughly tested and ready for real-world usage. By leveraging these networks, developers can avoid the costs and risks associated with live deployments while testing functionalities such as governance, cross-chain messaging, and runtime upgrades.

This guide covers the tools and networks designed to support a wide variety of development and testing needs in the Polkadot ecosystem, from local development nodes to community-run TestNets.

## Network Overview

Polkadot's development process is a well-structured path designed to ensure that upgrades and new features undergo thorough testing before reaching the live production networks. This diagram illustrates the typical progression of a Polkadot development cycle, starting from local environments and eventually reaching the Polkadot MainNet. 

> ``` mermaid

Reviewer: Just for future reference, maybe we could put mermaid files in their own snippets / code section? Doesn't have to be done in this PR specifically, but just a thought cc @eshaben

Reviewer 3: Yeah, we were just discussing this internally earlier this week. We can create a `.snippets/diagrams` directory

Reviewer 3: I'll create a ticket so we can address it separately

> ![Polkadot development flow](/images/polkadot-protocol/introduction/development-networks-01.webp)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
![Polkadot development flow](/images/polkadot-protocol/introduction/polkadot-networks-01.webp)
```

This image path should match the file name (not the title of the page), so can you please update the images directory?

Reviewer 3: Actuallllllyyy... I'd like to see this be turned into a mermaid diagram instead of an image. https://squidfunk.github.io/mkdocs-material/reference/diagrams/?h=mermaid

### Development Flow

> Application developers and end users of Polkadot ecosystem can test many features without risking or spending their tokens on production 
> networks by using tools like [Chopsticks](#chopsticks) and TestNets. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Application developers and end users of the Polkadot ecosystem can test many features without risking spending their tokens on production networks using tools like [Chopsticks](#chopsticks) and TestNets. 
```

A typical journey through the Polkadot development process might look like this:

> 1. **Local Development Node** - For core Polkadot developers, the process begins in a local environment where you can work on upgrades and experiment with new features using a local development node. This environment allows for rapid iteration and testing in an isolated setup without the need for interacting with external networks
> 
> 2. **Westend** - Once the upgrades are ready, they are deployed to [Westend](#westend), Polkadot's primary TestNet. Westend is designed to mimic the conditions of a live network without the risk of using real tokens. You can extensively test features here to ensure that everything works as expected before rolling them out to Kusama or Polkadot
> 
> 3. **Kusama** - After rigorous testing on Westend, the next step is Kusama. Kusama serves as Polkadot's experimental version and operates as a “canary network,” where features are deployed in a real-world environment with actual economic incentives. It's a high-fidelity testing ground for any potential network upgrade
> 
> 4. **Polkadot** - If an upgrade passes testing on Westend and Kusama, it is finally deployed to Polkadot, the MainNet. This workflow ensures that only thoroughly vetted changes make it to production

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. **Local Development Node** - for core Polkadot developers, the process begins in a local environment where you can work on upgrades and experiment with new features using a local development node. This environment allows for rapid iteration and testing in an isolated setup without the need for interacting with external networks

2. **Westend** - once the upgrades are ready, they are deployed to [Westend](#westend), Polkadot's primary TestNet. Westend is designed to mimic the conditions of a live network without the risk of using real tokens. You can extensively test features here to ensure that everything works as expected before rolling them out to Kusama or Polkadot

3. **Kusama** - after rigorous testing on Westend, the next step is Kusama. Kusama serves as Polkadot's experimental version and operates as a “canary network,” where features are deployed in a real-world environment with actual economic incentives. It's a high-fidelity testing ground for any potential network upgrade

4. **Polkadot** - if an upgrade passes testing on Westend and Kusama, it is finally deployed to Polkadot, the MainNet. This workflow ensures that only thoroughly vetted changes make it to production
```

> Parachain developers use local TestNets powered by tools like [Zombienet](#zombienet) and then deploy the upgrades on their respective
> parachains to a TestNet.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Parachain developers use local TestNets powered by tools like [Zombienet](#zombienet) and then deploy the upgrades on their respective parachains to a TestNet.
```

> - **Paseo** - Parachain developers often use Paseo, a community-run TestNet that mirrors Polkadot's runtime. Paseo provides parachain and dApp developers a space to test their applications with runtime environments that are closely aligned with Polkadot's without risking their projects on live networks

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- **Paseo** - parachain developers often use Paseo, a community-run TestNet that mirrors Polkadot's runtime. Paseo provides parachain and dApp developers a space to test their applications with runtime environments that are closely aligned with Polkadot's without risking their projects on live networks
```

!!!note
    The Rococo TestNet deprecation date is October 14, 2024. Teams should use Westend for Polkadot protocol and feature testing and Paseo for chain development-related testing.

## Kusama Network

Kusama is the experimental development network for teams who want to innovate, move fast, and test their applications in a production-grade environment with economics and game theory involved. It comprises a relay chain with its own governance, system chains, and parachains.

> Native token - KSM

Reviewer 3: I don't love this. Maybe we can do something like "The native token is KSM. You can find out more information about KSM on the [Native Assets]() page." - and link it to this: https://wiki.polkadot.network/docs/learn-DOT#kusama, which will eventually get migrated to `Polkadot Protocol > Protocol Components > Native Assets` (as of right now)

## Test Networks

The tokens for the test networks listed below are available through the [Polkadot faucet](https://faucet.polkadot.io/){target=\_blank}.

### Westend

Westend is a perma-TestNet that is not reset back to the genesis block. It is intended for Polkadot core developers and maintained by Parity Technologies. Westend is primarily used to test features that will be deployed onto Kusama and then to Polkadot. 

> Native token - WND

Reviewer 3: Here, maybe we can do something like "The native token is WND. You can find out more information about WND and how to obtain some for testing purposes on the [Native Assets]() page." - and link it to the westend section: https://wiki.polkadot.network/docs/learn-DOT#getting-tokens-on-the-westend-testnet which will eventually get migrated to `Polkadot Protocol > Protocol Components > Native Assets` (as of right now)

### Paseo

[Paseo](https://github.com/paseo-network){target=\_blank} is a community-run TestNet which mirrors the runtime of Polkadot and its system chains. It is intended for parachain and dApp developers and maintained by the members of 
Polkadot community.

> Native token - PAS

Reviewer 3: Similarly, here, we can do something like "The native token is PAS. You can find out more information about PAS and how to obtain some for testing purposes on the [Native Assets]() page." - and link it to the paseo section: https://wiki.polkadot.network/docs/learn-DOT#getting-tokens-on-the-paseo-testnet which will eventually get migrated to `Polkadot Protocol > Protocol Components > Native Assets` (as of right now)

## Local Test Networks

### Zombienet

[Zombienet](https://github.com/paritytech/zombienet){target=\_blank} is a testing framework for Polkadot SDK-based blockchains, allowing users to spawn and test ephemeral networks. 

### Chopsticks

> [Acala Chopsticks](https://github.com/AcalaNetwork/chopsticks){target=\_blank} lets you create a fork of any Polkadot SDK-based blockchain and interact with it. This tool can also be used to test cross chain applications.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
[Chopsticks](https://github.com/AcalaNetwork/chopsticks){target=\_blank} lets you create a fork of any Polkadot SDK-based blockchain and interact with it. This tool can also be used to test cross chain applications.
```

Whether you're a Polkadot core developer, parachain engineer, or application developer, the resources outlined here will help you ensure your solutions are thoroughly tested and ready for real-world usage. By leveraging these networks, developers can avoid the costs and risks associated with live deployments while testing functionalities such as governance, cross-chain messaging, and runtime upgrades.

This guide covers the tools and networks designed to support a wide variety of development and testing needs in the Polkadot ecosystem, from local development nodes to community-run TestNets.

## Network Overview

Polkadot's development process is a well-structured path designed to ensure that upgrades and new features undergo thorough testing before reaching the live production networks. This diagram illustrates the typical progression of a Polkadot development cycle, starting from local environments and eventually reaching the Polkadot MainNet. 

> ### Development Flow

Reviewer 3: I don't actually think we need a title since the sentence above introduces it 🤷‍♀️ , but if you want to have one, I'd propose putting this in bold instead of a header that shows up on the TOC

``` mermaid

flowchart LR
    id1[Local] --> id2[Westend] --> id4[Kusama] --> id5[Polkadot]  
    id1[Local] --> id3[Paseo] --> id5[Polkadot] 
```

In the Polkadot ecosystem, various features can be explored without risking or spending tokens on production networks by utilizing testing tools like [Chopsticks](#chopsticks) and engaging with TestNets. 

A typical journey through the Polkadot development process might look like this:

1. **Local development node** - for core Polkadot developers, the process begins in a local environment where you can work on upgrades and experiment with new features using a local development node. This environment allows for rapid iteration and testing in an isolated setup without the need for interacting with external networks

2. **Westend** - once the upgrades are ready, they are deployed to [Westend](#westend), Polkadot's primary TestNet. Westend is designed to mimic the conditions of a live network without the risk of using real tokens. You can extensively test features here to ensure that everything works as expected before rolling them out to Kusama or Polkadot

> 3. **Paseo** - parachain developers often use Paseo, a community-run TestNet that mirrors Polkadot's runtime. Paseo provides parachain and dApp developers a space to test their applications with runtime environments that are closely aligned with Polkadot's without risking their projects on live networks

Reviewer 3: I misled you, I'm sorry! 😬 

Paseo should be separate. We should say that there are two different development journeys, route one being Local > Westend > Kusama > Polkadot for testing core protocol features. Route two should be Local > Paseo > Polkadot for dapp and parachain developers to have a testing environment

Reviewer 3: @0xLucca feel free to confirm or suggest alternative changes to what I said 😬

Reviewer 2: Quoting from Paseo repository:
`Paseo is for Parachains and dapp builders to build and test their applications ontop of a stable testnet. The other testnet we have is Westend, which is for Parachains to perform protocol testing. Westend will be the environment to test new changes to the Polkadot relaychain and system chains, e.g. Coretime, Beefy, and Asycbacking.`

Whether you're a Polkadot core developer, parachain engineer, or application developer, the resources outlined here will help you ensure your solutions are thoroughly tested and ready for real-world usage. By leveraging these networks, developers can avoid the costs and risks associated with live deployments while testing functionalities such as governance, cross-chain messaging, and runtime upgrades.

This guide covers the tools and networks designed to support a wide variety of development and testing needs in the Polkadot ecosystem, from local development nodes to community-run TestNets.

## Network Overview

Polkadot's development process is a well-structured path designed to ensure that upgrades and new features undergo thorough testing before reaching the live production networks. This diagram illustrates the typical progression of a Polkadot development cycle, starting from local environments and eventually reaching the Polkadot MainNet. 

``` mermaid
---

> title: Polkadot Development Flow

Reviewer 3: Is there a way to put a square or something around the title?

Reviewer 4: I couldn't sort that out but, I did make a change. Let me know what you think!

---
flowchart LR
    id1[Local] --> id2[Westend] --> id4[Kusama] --> id5[Polkadot]  

>     id1[Local] --> id3[Paseo] --> id4[Kusama] 

Author: Most of the parachains have moved away from launching on Kusama. This flow reflects what the devs are doing right now.

```suggestion
    id1[Local] --> id3[Paseo] --> id4[Polkadot] 
```

```

### Development Flow

> Application developers and end users of Polkadot ecosystem can test many features without risking or spending their tokens on production networks by using tools like [Chopsticks](#chopsticks) and TestNets. 

Reviewer 3: Feels like this sentence can be generalized in some ways and also made explicit in other ways, haha. Parachain developers are another type of developer that might use Chopsticks and TestNets, so instead let's just generalize that aspect. Then, let's make it clear that Chopsticks is a tool, and TestNets are separate resources for testing.

```suggestion
In the Polkadot ecosystem, various features can be explored without risking or spending tokens on production networks by utilizing testing tools like [Chopsticks](#chopsticks) and engaging with TestNets.
```

A typical journey through the Polkadot development process might look like this:

> 1. **Local Development Node** - for core Polkadot developers, the process begins in a local environment where you can work on upgrades and experiment with new features using a local development node. This environment allows for rapid iteration and testing in an isolated setup without the need for interacting with external networks

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. **Local development node** - for core Polkadot developers, the process begins in a local environment where you can work on upgrades and experiment with new features using a local development node. This environment allows for rapid iteration and testing in an isolated setup without the need for interacting with external networks
```

> 2. **Westend** - once the upgrades are ready, they are deployed to [Westend](#westend), Polkadot's primary TestNet. Westend is designed to mimic the conditions of a live network without the risk of using real tokens. You can extensively test features here to ensure that everything works as expected before rolling them out to Kusama or Polkadot

Reviewer 3: I'd add Paseo here too

3. **Kusama** - after rigorous testing on Westend, the next step is Kusama. Kusama serves as Polkadot's experimental version and operates as a “canary network,” where features are deployed in a real-world environment with actual economic incentives. It's a high-fidelity testing ground for any potential network upgrade

> 4. **Polkadot** - if an upgrade passes testing on Westend and Kusama, it is finally deployed to Polkadot, the MainNet. This workflow ensures that only thoroughly vetted changes make it to production

Reviewer 3: "the MainNet" sort of makes it sound like Kusama is not a MainNet, which it is, so I think maybe this needs to be rephrased

Parachain developers use local TestNets powered by tools like [Zombienet](#zombienet) and then deploy the upgrades on their respective parachains to a TestNet.

> - **Paseo** - parachain developers often use Paseo, a community-run TestNet that mirrors Polkadot's runtime. Paseo provides parachain and dApp developers a space to test their applications with runtime environments that are closely aligned with Polkadot's without risking their projects on live networks

Reviewer 3: Ah ok. Maybe we should just combine this with the Westend option and mention them both at the same time so it doesn't seem like there is preference to one or the other

## Kusama Network

Kusama is the experimental development network for teams who want to innovate, move fast, and test their applications in a production-grade environment with economics and game theory involved. It comprises a relay chain with its own governance, system chains, and parachains.

The native token for Kusama is KSM. You can find more information about KSM on the [Native Assets](https://wiki.polkadot.network/docs/learn-DOT#kusama){target=\_blank} page.

## Test Networks

The tokens for the test networks listed below are available through the [Polkadot faucet](https://faucet.polkadot.io/){target=\_blank}.

### Westend

Westend is a perma-TestNet that is not reset back to the genesis block. It is intended for Polkadot core developers and maintained by Parity Technologies. Westend is primarily used to test features that will be deployed onto Kusama and then to Polkadot. 

The native token for Westend is WND. You can find more information about WND on the [Native Assets](https://wiki.polkadot.network/docs/learn-DOT#getting-tokens-on-the-westend-testnet){target=\_blank} page.

### Paseo

> [Paseo](https://github.com/paseo-network){target=\_blank} is a community-run TestNet which mirrors the runtime of Polkadot and its system chains. It is intended for parachain and dApp developers and maintained by the members of 
> Polkadot community.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
[Paseo](https://github.com/paseo-network){target=\_blank} is a community-run TestNet that mirrors the runtime of Polkadot and its system chains. It is intended for parachain and dApp developers and maintained by members of the Polkadot community.
```
